Add blog post: Keyless Security with Tekton Chains (#731)
tektoncd/website: content/en/blog/2026/keyless-security-with-tekton-chains/index.md

---
title: "Keyless Security with Tekton Chains"
linkTitle: "Keyless Security with Chains"
date: 2026-06-03
author: "Anitha Natarajan, Red Hat"
description: >
  How keyless signing with Tekton Chains lets you sign everything your pipelines
  build without ever managing a signing key.
---

> Software supply chain attacks have moved from theoretical to routine. Typosquatted packages, compromised distribution sites, and post-publish tampering are now standard entries in any threat model. The defensive answer is old and well understood: sign your artifacts cryptographically so consumers can trace them back to a known source and confirm nothing changed after the build. The hard part was never the signing. It was the keys.

Reviewer: Is this the defensive answer? Does just signing artifacts help to trace them back to their sources or are you saying that provenance is a signature here?

It can sign three kinds of subjects: OCI images, `TaskRuns`, and `PipelineRuns`. Provenance is emitted as [in-toto attestations](https://in-toto.io/), which describe the inputs, steps, and outputs of a build in a structured, verifiable format useful for auditing and for satisfying [SLSA](https://slsa.dev/)-style policy requirements.

## The keyless idea in one paragraph

Instead of holding a signing key, a Sigstore client generates a throwaway key pair for a single signing operation. It presents an OIDC identity token to [Fulcio](https://docs.sigstore.dev/certificate_authority/overview/), Sigstore's free certificate authority. Fulcio verifies the token and issues a short-lived certificate that binds the freshly generated public key to the identity in the token. The client signs the artifact, the signing event is recorded in [Rekor](https://docs.sigstore.dev/logging/overview/) (the transparency log), and the private key is discarded immediately. There is no key to store, rotate, or leak. Verification later relies on the certificate, the recorded identity, and the transparency log entry rather than on a key you have to distribute.

> The crucial insight for CI is that the identity in the OIDC token doesn't have to be a human. It can be a workload. That's exactly what Tekton Chains exploits.

Reviewer: Exploits is valid but it feels malicious in the context of this post. Maybe an alternative word would be better. 

```suggestion
The crucial insight for CI is that the identity in the OIDC token doesn't have to be a human. It can be a workload. That's exactly what Tekton Chains leverages.
```

## How keyless works inside Tekton Chains

In keyless mode, Chains does not look for a signing secret. Instead it requests an identity token from the cluster it is running in, then uses that token to obtain a Fulcio certificate for the artifact being signed. This is the same OIDC signing flow [Cosign](https://docs.sigstore.dev/cosign/overview/) uses, but the token comes from the cluster's service account machinery rather than a browser login.

> The mechanism that makes this work on managed Kubernetes is the cluster's OIDC provider combined with [projected service account tokens](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/#service-account-token-volume-projection). The cluster issues a short-lived, audience-scoped token representing the workload's service account identity, and Fulcio accepts that token as proof of identity. This has been tested on GKE, EKS, and AKS, and should work on any environment that supports Cosign OIDC signing.

Reviewer: Is that supposed to be an anchor that resolves? This just brings me to the top of the page.

> 

Reviewer: Worth noting here (or in the caveats section) that many enterprise/on-prem environments run a private Fulcio and Rekor rather than the public endpoints. Readers on private infrastructure would benefit from knowing upfront that the same flow applies; they just point `fulcio.address` and `transparency.url` at their own instances. The caveats section later covers this, but a forward reference would help set expectations early.

(assisted-by: claude)

The full flow looks like this:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A["PipelineRun / TaskRun completes"] --> B["Tekton Chains controller<br/>detects completed run"]
    B --> C["Generate provenance<br/>(in-toto attestation)"]
    C --> D["Request projected<br/>service account token<br/>from cluster OIDC provider"]
    D --> E["Present OIDC token to Fulcio"]
    E --> F["Fulcio verifies identity<br/>and issues short-lived certificate"]
    F --> G["Sign artifact with<br/>ephemeral key pair"]
    G --> I["Discard ephemeral private key"]

>     G --> J["Write results back as annotations<br/>on the TaskRun / PipelineRun"]

Reviewer: The diagram skips the ephemeral keypair generation step. The keypair is generated *before* the Fulcio request — the public key is part of the CSR Fulcio signs — so this node should come earlier.

Actual order:
1. Generate ephemeral keypair
2. Present OIDC token + public key to Fulcio → receive cert
3. Sign with ephemeral private key
4. Discard private key

The prose above the diagram describes this correctly; the diagram alone would mislead. Consider adding a node between C and D: `C --> D2["Generate ephemeral key pair"]` before the Fulcio request step.

(assisted-by: claude)

    G -. if transparency logging is on .-> H["Record signing event in<br/>Rekor transparency log"]
    G -. if OCI storage is configured .-> K["Push signature and provenance<br/>to OCI registry"]

    style A fill:#e8f0fe,stroke:#4285f4,color:#000
    style B fill:#e8f0fe,stroke:#4285f4,color:#000
    style F fill:#fce8e6,stroke:#ea4335,color:#000
    style H fill:#e6f4ea,stroke:#34a853,color:#000
    style I fill:#fef7e0,stroke:#fbbc04,color:#000
```

> Once Chains successfully gets a certificate and signs, it writes the results back as base64-encoded annotations on the `TaskRun` or `PipelineRun` — the certificate, the payload, the signature, a `chains.tekton.dev/signed: true` marker, and, if transparency logging is on, a `chains.tekton.dev/transparency` URL pointing at the Rekor entry.

Reviewer: What is it signing here?

> Once Chains successfully gets a certificate and signs

feels incompelte.

## Turning it on

Enabling keyless mode is a one-line change to the Chains config map. You switch on the Fulcio signer:

```shell
kubectl patch configmap chains-config -n tekton-chains \
  -p='{"data":{"signers.x509.fulcio.enabled": "true"}}'
```

> A fuller configuration that signs in-toto provenance, stores signatures in your OCI registry, and records events in the public Rekor instance looks like this:

Reviewer: Is there a different work that would work better?

```suggestion
A more complete configuration that signs in-toto provenance, stores signatures in your OCI registry, and records events in the public Rekor instance looks like this:
```
```suggestion
A more detailed configuration that signs in-toto provenance, stores signatures in your OCI registry, and records events in the public Rekor instance looks like this:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: chains-config
  namespace: tekton-chains
data:
  # What to sign and how to format it
  artifacts.taskrun.format: "in-toto"
  artifacts.taskrun.storage: "oci"
  artifacts.taskrun.signer: "x509"

  # Sign PipelineRuns too — provenance pushed to the OCI registry
  artifacts.pipelinerun.format: "in-toto"
  artifacts.pipelinerun.storage: "oci"
  artifacts.pipelinerun.signer: "x509"

  # OCI image signature storage
  artifacts.oci.storage: "oci"
  artifacts.oci.format: "simplesigning"
  artifacts.oci.signer: "x509"

  # Transparency log
  transparency.enabled: "true"
  transparency.url: "https://rekor.sigstore.dev"

  # Keyless: use Fulcio instead of a stored key
  signers.x509.fulcio.enabled: "true"
  signers.x509.fulcio.address: "https://fulcio.sigstore.dev"
  signers.x509.fulcio.issuer: "https://oauth2.sigstore.dev/auth"

> ```

Reviewer: This will break cluster signing. `signers.x509.fulcio.issuer` should be the cluster's own OIDC issuer URL, not the public Sigstore OIDC broker. When Chains presents a projected service account token to Fulcio, Fulcio validates the token against the issuer URL configured here — if it's set to `https://oauth2.sigstore.dev/auth`, Fulcio will reject the cluster's tokens.

This field should either be omitted (Fulcio uses the `iss` claim from the token) or set to the cluster's OIDC discovery URL. You can find it with:
```shell
kubectl get --raw /.well-known/openid-configuration | jq -r .issuer
```

(assisted-by: claude)

> One thing this example leaves implicit: with `storage: "oci"` and no `storage.oci.repository` set, Chains stores the attestations alongside the built image — which only works if your run actually builds an image and emits `IMAGE_URL` / `IMAGE_DIGEST` type-hinting results. If it doesn't produce an image, set `storage.oci.repository` to a repository explicitly, or store provenance in the `tekton` annotation backend instead.

Reviewer: Do readers need to know how to use the annotation backend? Would this just be by having no configuration or is there a documentation you can point to for the storage options/configuration? Using the documentation for details might read better.

Transparency logging is its own toggle, defaulting to the public Rekor instance, and you can point it at a private Rekor if you run one:

```shell
kubectl patch configmap chains-config -n tekton-chains \
  -p='{"data":{"transparency.enabled": "true"}}'

kubectl patch configmap chains-config -n tekton-chains \
  -p='{"data":{"transparency.url": "<YOUR URL>"}}'
```

> Note that signatures and provenance still need to be pushed somewhere. Chains looks for OCI registry credentials in the pod running your task and in the service account configured for it, so you'll typically create a `dockerconfigjson` secret and attach it to that service account.

Reviewer: Do you need to introduce the concept of what all Chains can see/use from the TaskRuns?

## Verifying what you signed

A signature you never check is theater. Because keyless signing records every event in Rekor, verification doesn't depend on you having a key — it depends on matching the recorded identity and confirming inclusion in the log.

> The transparency annotation on each run holds the Rekor entry URL, and you can explore entries through Rekor's API or a web UI. The Chainguard team runs a public [Rekor Search UI](https://rekor.tlog.dev/), where you can look up entries by log index, email, hash, commit SHA, or UUID. That searchability is the practical payoff of the model: an identity owner can monitor the log to confirm their identity is only being used for signing events they expect, and a consumer can confirm a certificate was valid at signing time.

Reviewer: While there is nothing inherently wrong with this, it feels like the wrong perspecitve. I wouldn't expect a producer to verify all of this in rekor regularly. I don't know how commonplace rekor log monitoring actually is. 

I feel like the thread model would be more on a consumer side of things -- verifying expectations around artifacts? This is more of the model that SLSA proposes.

The progression here is roughly "least key management" to "most control over the key." Keyless removes key management entirely; KMS keeps the key in cloud infrastructure you control. Many teams run keyless for public, auditable artifacts and reserve KMS for cases with regulatory or air-gap constraints.

## What's possible right now — and the caveats

What works today is a complete, hands-off loop: every `TaskRun` and `PipelineRun` in the cluster gets signed provenance and a signature, bound to a workload identity, with no key to manage, and a public audit trail in Rekor — all from flipping a config flag on managed Kubernetes.

A few realities to plan around:

- **OIDC token format matters.** Recent Chains releases ship Cosign v2.6.0 or later, which no longer accepts HS256-signed JWTs. Public Sigstore (Fulcio), key-based signing, and private OIDC providers using RS256 are unaffected, but if you run a private OIDC provider on HS256 you must switch to RS256 before upgrading. This is the kind of detail that silently breaks a pipeline, so check it before you bump versions.

> - **Cluster OIDC is a prerequisite.** Keyless mode depends on your cluster being able to issue projected service account tokens that Fulcio trusts. On EKS, for example, that means creating the cluster with OIDC enabled (`eksctl create cluster --with-oidc ...`). On a cluster without a usable OIDC provider, keyless won't work and you'll fall back to a key-based mode.

Reviewer: "Recent Chains releases" ages poorly in blog posts. Consider pinning to a specific Chains version (e.g. "Chains v0.22+" or whichever release first shipped Cosign ≥2.6.0) so this remains actionable after the post has been live for a while.

(assisted-by: claude)

- **"Keyless" is a convenience, not the literal absence of keys.** Fulcio still operates a root of trust on behalf of the whole community, protected by a distributed key ceremony and [The Update Framework](https://theupdateframework.io/). The point isn't that keys vanish — it's that *you* no longer manage signing keys.
- **Public vs. private infrastructure is a real choice.** Signing against the public Fulcio and Rekor means your identities and signing metadata land in public logs. For internal-only artifacts that may be undesirable, and you can self-host Fulcio and Rekor to run an entirely private signing ecosystem. Machine-identity approaches based on [SPIFFE/SVID](https://spiffe.io/) fit naturally here, though running your own stack is meaningfully more work than flipping a flag.
- **Verification is on you.** Chains makes signing automatic; it does not make anyone check the signatures. You'll want a policy gate — Sigstore's [Policy Controller](https://docs.sigstore.dev/policy-controller/overview/) is the common companion — to actually enforce that only properly signed, properly attested artifacts get admitted or deployed.

## Where this fits

> Keyless signing with Tekton Chains is one of the cleaner answers available today to "how do I sign everything my pipeline produces without drowning in key management?" The setup cost is low, the audit story is strong, and the model composes well with the broader supply chain security ecosystem — in-toto for provenance, SLSA as the policy framework it feeds, and Policy Controller for enforcement.

Reviewer: I still think that this question of how do you sign everything in a pipeline is wrong. If I had a single identity that freely signed anything in a pipeline, I wouldn't trust it. I trust Chains as an identity to generate provenance and nothing else.

> Keyless signing with Tekton Chains is one of the cleaner answers available today to "how do I sign everything my pipeline produces without drowning in key management?" The setup cost is low, the audit story is strong, and the model composes well with the broader supply chain security ecosystem — in-toto for provenance, SLSA as the policy framework it feeds, and Policy Controller for enforcement.

Reviewer: This phrasing feels awkward. I don't know what you are claiming for the individual parts.

>  — in-toto for provenance, SLSA as the policy framework it feeds, and Policy Controller for enforcement.

Author: This section is revisited to address an overarching view of where chains fits in the supply chain
